MINES AND MINERALS
(DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 1957
(No. 67 of 1957)
An Act to provide for the 1
[development and regulation of mines and minerals] under the
control of the Union.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: -
PRELIMINARY
Short title, extent and commencement.
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals 2
[(Development and Regulation)]
 Act, 1957.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govt. may, by Notification in the
 Official Gazette, appoint.
Declaration as to the expediency of Union control.

2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should take
under its control the regulation of mines and the development of minerals to the extent
hereinafter provided.
Definitions.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:-
(a) "minerals” includes all minerals except mineral oils;
(b) "mineral oils" includes natural gas and petroleum;
(c) "mining lease” means a lease granted for the purpose of undertaking mining operations,
and includes a sub-lease granted for such purpose;
(d) “mining operations" means any operations undertaken for the purpose of winning any
mineral;

(e) "minor minerals" means building stones, gravel, ordinary clay, ordinary sand other than
sand used for prescribed purposes, and any other mineral which the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a minor mineral;
(f) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) "prospecting licence" means a licence granted for the purpose of undertaking prospecting
operations;
(h) "prospecting operations" means any operations undertaken for the purpose of exploring,
locating or proving mineral deposit; 1
[ Omitted ]
2
[(ha) “reconnaissance operations” means any operations undertaken for preliminary
prospecting of a mineral through regional, aerial, geophysical or geochemical surveys and
geological mapping, but does not include pitting, trenching, drilling (except drilling of bore
holes on a grid specified from time to time by the Central Government) or sub-surface
excavation;
(hb) “reconnaissance permit” means a permit granted for the purpose of undertaking
reconnaissance operations; and]
(i) the expressions "mine" and "owner" have the meanings assigned to them in the Mines
Act, 1952.